In this video we'll learn about how constructors work when we use inheritance.
We know that a derived class inherits data and methods from its base class before C++ can initialize
the derived object.
It must initialize the base part of the derived object.
This makes sense since the derived class might use base class information during its own initialization.
So since constructors are responsible for object initialization when a Derived object is created first
the base class constructor executes and then the derived constructor executes.
Let's see a simple example with no arms constructors
in this example.
We have a base class that has a no args constructor that simply displays base constructor and we have
a derived class that inherits publicly from base to drive.
Class also has no args constructor and it displays derived constructor.
Now let's create a base class object and a derived class object and see how the constructors are called.
First let's create a base object from the base class.
In this case there is no inheritance involved so we expect the base class constructor to be invoked.
And that's exactly what happens.
Now if we created derived class object.
This is where things change.
In this case we have inheritance.
Since the derived class is a base class so C plus initialize is the base part of the derived object
first and you can see on the right hand side of the slide that the base constructor is invoked first
and then the derived constructor is invoked.
Now let's look at how destructors are handled class destructors are invoked in the reverse order as
the constructors so the derived part of the class must be destroyed before the base part is.
Again this makes sense.
So when a Derived object is destroyed first the derived class destructor executes then the base class
destructor executes each destructor should free any resources that its own class constructor is allocated.
In this slide we added destructors to the base and derived classes.
The destructor simply display base destructor or derived destructor when there and vote.
So let's create those to same base and derived objects now and see the output.
First let's look at the base class object.
In this case again we're not using inheritance at all.
So the output on the right side of the slide is exactly what we expect.
First the base constructor is invoked and then the base destructor is invoked and the object is destroyed.
Now let's see what happens when we create a Derived object first the derived object must be initialized
and we know that the base part must be initialized before the derived part.
So you can see that the base constructor is invoked and then the derived constructor is invoked.
Now when the object is destroyed the opposite happens.
First the derived destructor is invoked and then the base destructor is invoked.
This order of construction and destruction occurs in the same manner whether you have two classes or
ten classes in the hierarchy.
Finally let's talk about a few important topics in inheritance and what is not inherited automatically
a derived class does not inherit base class constructors base class destructor.
The base class overloaded assignment operators and base class friends.
However we can invoke base class constructors destructors.
An overloaded assignment operators from the derived classes.
Sometimes you will see a using base scope operator base directive in the body of a derived class.
This was introduced in C++ 11 to allow explicit inheritance of base class constructors.
There are lots of rules associated with this.
For example default copy and move constructors are not included.
Each inherited constructor has the same access specifier as its corresponding base class constructor.
If you provide an overloaded constructor in the derived class then the base class overloaded constructor
is not inherited.
A base class constructor default arguments are not inherited.
So you can see it as a bunch of rules.
These are just a few.
However the using statement can be useful and save a bit of typing but I prefer not to use this feature
and write out the constructors I need in my derived classes and invoke the base class constructors as
needed.
It isn't that much more typing and it's very clear to programmers that come after you to modify your
code exactly what you're doing.
Let's head over to the ID and I'll show you how this works in live code.
Hello.
So I'm in the section 15 workspace and I'm in the constructors and destructors project and what we'll
do is we'll step through the debugger and will see exactly when these constructors are called.
We absolutely understand you know the order that things happen in and what and what isn't inherited
in this case.
So here I've got a base class that has an integer attribute named vallium and it's got a simple no args
constructor here that sets value to 0.
It's got an overloaded constructor that expects an integer and sets the value to that integer and it's
got a simple destructor and all of these just say what they're doing.
Base no args base and base destructor.
We also have a derived class which is derived publicly from base and it adds its own attribute doubles
value which is just that value double two times the value.
And it's got its own constructors here destructor.
But I've commented all of them out for now and what we'll do is we'll uncomment them as we go.
So let's start with the simple example.
We're here in the main and let's create a base object and we'll just call it.
Be really really straightforward.
We're not using any inheritance at all here we're not using derived.
We're only dealing with base so let's review that and make sure that that's very clear what's going
on.
So if I step through the debugger here what we've got going on is let me move this screen over here
to the right.
So what we've got going on here is we're right here on line 26.
We're just about to create that base object.
Now what we expect is for the base no args constructor be called to set that value to zero and then
to display no Ark's right.
And then when he goes out of scope we expect a base destructor to be called to clean it up.
That's really what we've seen up to this point in the course.
And it should be pretty straightforward at this point.
So let's step through and you can see right now we're on line 26 right here.
As I step through.
Now I'm coming up to line 11 which is our base.
No args constructor.
It's going to initialize value to 0 and then just simply display base no args constructor and that's
exactly what happened.
Now Bigos out of scope.
So we expect the base class destructor recalled.
And let me step through here.
There we go.
Number on line 13.
You can see the destructor is being called and obviously the value is 0 and right.
It was set to 0 by the constructor here.
So at this point we get the destructor called and our program is complete.
OK that's pretty straightforward that what we can do is we can just change this just a little bit and
what we'll do is I'll comment this out just to keep it in the code so when you guys can play with it
on your own what would you hear and I would just say base Bill Cosby again and this time with 100 and
I'll move the breakpoint down to here.
So what we're doing is we're creating a B object which is a base class object and we're providing the
100 as an initialiser.
So what happens here.
Well in this case again we're not working with derived Yes we're not using inheritance.
We expect the overloaded constructor here on line 12 to execute which expects an integer.
We expect it to set the value to 100 in this case and then just display base int overloaded constructor
when the object is goes out of scope.
We expect the destructor to be called.
OK so let's do that and we'll get these these base examples out of the way so that we can definitely
work on the derived examples and understand it better.
Ok so I'm here in 9:27.
I'm going to step through here I am on line 12.
That's exactly what I expected.
I'm providing an integer so that overloaded constructor right here that expects an integer is called.
It's going to initialize value to 100 which is what I'm passing in and if I look at B's value.
There you go you can see the hundred.
Now the object goes out of scope and the destructor is called right there.
So you see the base class destructor is called.
OK so that's real simple examples using base object.
Now let's create some derived objects.
So for our first example what we'll do is we'll come at that line out and what we'll do is we'll just
simply create a derived object we'll just call it D and we'll provide no initialization information.
So what do we expect to happen.
Well look at all these constructors here.
They're all commented out.
So when we don't provide a constructor we get a default constructor right at default.
No args constructor that's going to be called in derived.
But because we're in derived and it's derived from base we need to create our base part.
So automatically the base class is a default constructor right here will be called.
So in this case what's going to happen is that this value will be set in my base part but this double
value will never be set because I'm not using my own version of this.
No args constructor OK.
So let's run through this one and we'll run the debugger here.
And you can see what's going on here.
I'm right on line 28.
I'm just about to create that derived object.
Now obviously the derived objects.
Default constructor is going to get called It's not here right.
That's because it's compiler provided and it's going to call the base class constructor.
You can see right there because you heard almost really just skipped our own default constructor of
the derived class.
It didn't really skip it it actually got called it's just not doing anything because it's precompiler
provided.
So in this case I'm setting value to zero and saying Based no args constructor right here and now I'm
back.
But now look at the state that derived design you see derives base has a value zero.
Right.
That's exactly what we expected because the base default constructor was called.
But this doubled value was never set.
So I've got garbage here.
OK.
So hopefully that makes sense.
Now what we can do is to fix this is we can uncomment out this guy right here.
So now we've just uncommented our own.
No args destructor.
So let's run this again now and you'll see exactly what happens.
OK so now in this case again I'm on line 28 I'm just about to create that derived object again with
no information here.
No and no initialization information.
So I step through.
This time our own version of our no args constructor gets called Right.
And what's going to happen right now is the base constructor gets called because before it started executing
anything in this derived constructor the base part of me must be initialized.
So you can see when I select the step here.
Now invoke that base class default constructor.
It's going to set value to 0 and say based no args constructor then I come back down here to the constructor
which sets my doubled value to 0 and then displays that message that happened kind of quick.
I think I double clicked.
So what happens here is look at my object now the base part is 0 and the doubled value part is zero.
OK so there you can see that we are really chaining here and we're taking care of our own attributes
and that's what you really want.
You want the base class to handle its value.
You want to derive class to handle its double value.
OK so now let's do another example here.
And again I'll comment this out so I'll leave it in there so that you can play with it.
Create a Derived object.
And let's pass in 2002 a move the breakpoint down here.
OK so now what do we expect.
Well we expect are derived classes overloaded integer constructor to be called this guy right here.
It's commented out right now.
So this won't compile right as far as the compiler is concerned.
It doesn't know anything about this.
And remember these constructors are not inherited.
If this constructor appear on 9:12 was inherited then that would be called and will force that in a
minute.
But for now it's just compiled in a single C that we do get a compiler error right here that says no
matching function call.
So basically it can't find that constructor because it's not there.
So let's uncomment that out and tell it that it's there.
Now what do we expect when that what we expect is that we execute this line here on line 29 and we want
to create that object.
What's going to happen is the constructor here on 9:21 executes but what's going to execute up here
what we really want is for this guy to execute right this one on line 12 the overloaded integer constructor
but that's not going to happen because I'm not explicitly calling it.
We'll learn how to do that in the next video.
What's going to happen here is that the base class default constructor right here is called.
OK so let's walk through this.
OK so again I'm on 9:29 I'm just about to create that object and you can see now that line 21 executes
right.
That's my overloaded constructor that expects an integer.
That's exactly right.
So now the base part of me needs to be initialized the compiler is not going to guess as to which one
of these to call.
So it's simply going to call the no args version and set that value to zero.
And when I step through this you can see right there that no args version of the constructor is being
called.
It set the value to zero.
You can see right there based no args then the derived constructor gets called and finishes off by initializing
its its double value to two times x.
And if you look right now at the state of this object right here you can see that the base is indeed
zero because that constructor took care of it.
And the double value is two thousand.
We probably wanted the value to be 1000 not 0 but we didn't do that because we really don't know how
to call these constructors yet.
Like I said we'll do that in the next video.
OK.
And then obviously the destructors get called.
All right so what if we didn't have this right here I'll comment that out.
We saw that didn't compile a second ago.
But what we could do is we can use a using statement and we could just say using base base and what
that will do is it will allow us to inherit the non-special constructor's from my base class.
And this is a non-special constructor you can think of the special constructors as a default as a copy
constructor.
That kind of thing.
So now this will be inherited.
So this line right here.
What it will do is since that's inherited it matches.
So this will be called and again that has a problem right because it's not going to deal with the double
value.
So let's run this through the debugger and we'll walk through this and we're right here now we're creating
that derived object.
You notice it compiled right before didn't compile Well this time it compiled because I'm inheriting
this one.
So it's available in my derived so it does match that integer right.
So when I execute this you'll see what happens is that this guy gets called right here on line 12.
There you go.
So control is right here now.
So I'm going to initialize the base part of me to a thousand.
But now look at the state of D.
My base is correct the vows of my doubled value never got initialized right because I simply inherited
that.
And that's one of the issues with using automatically inheriting your non-special constructors.
It'll take care of initializing the base part of you but it won't take care of initializing the derive
part of it.
So you really should do that yourself.
Unless I said learn how to do all that in the next video.
But it's important that you understand this behavior first and then I'll just uncomment these last two
out and then you'll see the whole thing happening.
So at this point let's run this one final time.
So right here we're creating a derived object with a thousand as an initializer.
And what we expect is to 9:22 to be called.
That's exactly correct.
Now obviously behind the scenes what's going to happen is we were not going to guess as to which constructor
to call in the base class so it's going to call the no args.
You can see that happening right here.
That'll set value to 0.
Display the message.
Then we come back and that will set double the value to x times too.
So in this case you can see I've got zero in 2000 again which is not what I want but then the destructors
get called and you'll see what happens here.
First the destructor for the derived gets called.
And then the destructor for the base gets called.
So the destructors happen in the order opposite from the constructors.
OK.
Now this isn't really what we want.
We really would like this to be a thousand value 1000 double value 2000.
And like I said we'll learn how to do them the next video when we learn about calling our base class
constructors explicitly from the derived constructors.